Good morning.
My name is Blaine Garst.
Thank you for coming to the
Objective-C Advancements In-Deepth talk.
Today's talk is in two parts.
In the first part,
I'm going to be talking about
Objective-C language extensions,
extensions that work anytime, anywhere,
and then a fair amount of detail on
extensions that only apply under Arc.
And in the second half of the talk,
given by Greg Parker,
he'll talk about Arc internals,
implementation details you may or may
not need to be aware of that could
well be very interesting anyway,
some performance slides,
and some other things.
So everything we talk about
today is available via the
LLVM Compiler 3 found in Xcode 4.2.
So you have to be using that compiler
to see all of these features.
So let's just get started with the
extensions that work everywhere.
So the first one you've
already seen a little bit.
You've seen addAutoReleasePool.
In the example code you see there,
you've typed this again and again, maybe.
I don't know,
maybe some of you have never had
to code up an AutoReleasePool,
but if you have,
due to some performance concerns,
this is what you have to do.
Now,
the thing about an AutoReleasePool is,
even though it's an object,
you alloc and init it,
it's not really much of an object.
You can't really, well, for example,
have you ever tried to retain a pool?
Have you ever tried to stick it as a
global variable or an instance variable?
It just doesn't really work as an
object because really it fronts for
a background service that sits and
works on every thread's behalf to hold
onto intermediate temporary objects.
And so the object part is just
a thin veneer on top of that,
and what we've done in the compiler
is we've added syntax for it.
We have an addAutoReleasePool construct
that gives you exactly the scope
for where you want that collection
of temporary results to happen.
Because of the fact that we're no
longer pretending that it's an object,
it's a lot faster,
we've done lots of optimizations,
and this is the construct that you
should use everywhere all the time.
Let's take a look at another feature.
here.
Let's talk about instance
variable declarations.
Instance variables are, as you know,
declared in the Add Interface section.
Well, shoot,
how often are your instance variables
really part of your interface?
Your interface is the methods you expose.
You don't really expose
public instance variables,
so instance variables aren't
really part of your interface,
but we require you to declare them there,
and that's not really very
good information hiding.
So I'm glad to say there's
been some movement on this.
So on iOS and on Mac OS X 64, 64-bit,
we have some new opportunities for you.
You can now declare instance
variables in a class extension or
or directly in your add
implementation file.
Okay, I can tell.
I don't need to say any more about this,
but in fact I'm going to anyway.
I'm going to give you an example.
So let's say you have a wonderful class,
an elegant class,
and it hides all these messy details.
That's what you want
to write a class for,
right?
But you have to expose all those
messy details in your header file.
So let's take one example.
Let's say you've got a single
file implementation of this.
What you really want to do is
take those messy details and
just move them straight down into
your add implementation section.
You end up with a clean public header
and the details where it's important,
where you can actually use them.
Let's take the same case,
the same messy public header file,
but let's say you've got
multiple implementation
files that need that header.
Well,
that's where you use the class extension.
You move your details
into the class extension,
leaving you with the same clean header.
You put the class extension in a shared
private header that is then imported and
used by all of your implementation files,
and you've solved it
for that case as well.
Now, for those of you who aren't so
familiar with a class extension,
the syntax is very much like a category
only without the category name.
So I have a funny feeling that
class extensions are going to
get a lot more use nowadays.
Let's go on for a,
take a look at another feature.
So every great app
starts with a great idea.
So let's say you've got a great idea,
and in this case,
let's say you want to ship it on iOS 5.
That's great.
But you don't want to
limit your app to iOS 5.
You want it to deploy down
to earlier releases as well,
iOS 4, iOS 3.
So that's fine.
We know how to do this.
You start with the iOS 5 SDK,
and you just set the
deployment target down to 3.1.
Okay, that's fine.
Code along for a while.
Then you come across a really
neat new feature that's in iOS 5.
You go, hey, I know where I can use
that some of the time.
How do I do that?
In this case, I'm talking about a
JSON serialization class,
for example.
And so the way we ask you to do it
today is to look that class up at
runtime dynamically by string name.
Okay.
So you put it into a variable
that represents the class,
and then you message the class.
And so this works.
There can be some issues if you
forget how to spell the new thing.
forget how to spell the methods
that you're supposed to use with it.
And so I'm happy to tell you that
there's another way to do this.
It's called weak linking for classes.
And you just use the class more or
less the way you would otherwise.
You simply test to see whether
it yields a non-nil result.
Okay.
Because on earlier releases
where that class doesn't exist,
that reference,
that NS JSON serialization
string yields a nil value.
Now,
the other important advantage of this
is that we don't have any mechanism
prior to this that would allow you
to subclass one of these new things.
Now, JSON serialization is not really
a class you're going to subclass,
but there are plenty of
classes that you might want to,
and you now can do that using
the weak linking facility.
Okay.
So it deploys down to iOS 3.1,
and the most recent Mac was 10, 10.6.8.
There's a slight caveat.
If the entire package
doesn't exist on 3.1,
then this doesn't work.
So it's really for classes in
new classes in packages that
exist on earlier platforms.
But this is a much better way to do it.
You get static type checking,
everything you want.
Okay.
Let's go on to another one.
Stronger type checking.
How many people have declared a variable
to be one type and then goofed up and
initialized it with something else?
I see hands.
Well, I've done this, okay,
and I have to find out about
it at runtime quite often,
right?
Well, no longer.
So, compiler has been taught that the
init method is the initializer for
classes and that it returns an instance
of the class that it's sent to.
So, the compiler knows that it returns
an instance of that type and that
an instance of a mutable set is
not appropriate to be assigned
into a variable that's supposed
to be holding a mutable array.
And so,
we get a nice compiler warning at this,
from this.
And so, you should always do that.
Always look through your warnings
because sometimes they can
save your app from crashing.
Now with that,
that's actually an interesting
prelude because by teaching the
compiler about the init method,
that's a lot of what
we're doing with Arc.
So let's talk about Arc.
So if you've gone to the preview talks,
which I hope you have,
you'll know that Automatic Reference
Counting automates your retain,
release, and auto-releases.
It works for Objective-C objects only,
doesn't try to deal
with malloc and freeze,
and it doesn't work -- it doesn't
automate your use of core foundation or
core graphics or some of these non-NS
object-based objects on our system.
And of course,
it interoperates with existing retain,
release frameworks and code.
So the question is,
how does the compiler get
it right all the time?
And the answer is two things.
We've taught the compiler
about Cocoa conventions.
And we've taught the compiler about
ownership rules for variables.
So let's talk about each
of these in more detail.
COCA conventions.
The language,
the Objective-C language itself
does not specify allocation,
initialization, or destruction.
Cocoa does this.
We changed this 18 years ago.
It used to be there was new and free,
and we introduced
ALEC and NIT and whatever,
this Cocoa family of methods.
And you all, you know,
have been asked to learn these
in order to program properly
and carefully on Apple products.
Well, after 18 years,
it's time we put these into the language,
don't you think?
So that's what we've done with Arc.
So let's talk about these in more detail.
So methods beginning with ALEC and NIT,
new and copy yield,
what we call plus one retained items.
You have had to know to have
a plan to get rid of that
object or else it would leak.
So this works great.
The compiler makes this happen.
So for example, if you have, say,
a singleton or maybe an
immutable value object,
you know, the copy is just returned self.
And so what Arc does is make
sure that you return a plus one.
You don't have to think
about that anymore.
Good.
It works.
It's fine.
It's very neat.
But what about names that
don't follow conventions?
Hmm.
Okay.
Let's think about it.
Let's say you've got some
unconventional names.
Let's say you've got a copyright
notice and a copy left license,
or you like to create objects
with a make new thing primitive.
Well, hmm.
We're not really copying a right
notice or copying a left license.
You know, that's just -- you know,
we humans can read
this and understand it,
but the compiler can't.
So, hmm, is this going to be an issue?
Well, let's take a look at one of them.
Let's say you've got a license
implementation that returns a license,
and you've got a client
of that somewhere else,
the copy left license client.
If you compile both of
these files under Arc,
Compiler introduces a
retain where you create one,
and it introduces a
release where you use it.
Even though it may not
be what you intended,
it just works.
So if everything you code
up is compiled under Arc,
it just works and you probably
don't have to worry about it.
Let's take a look at a
couple other scenarios.
Let's say you have some code
that's compiled not with Arc,
and you're trying to use
it from Arc compiled code.
Well, obviously,
the compiler doesn't know this,
and so in the Arc compiled code,
we're going to do a release
that's really unbalanced.
And so you're going to
over-release this object and not
good things are going to happen.
Conversely, if you compile the copyleft
license code under Arc,
it's going to do that extra retain,
but the client isn't
going to know about that,
and so you're going to leak.
So what can you do about it?
Well, we have two answers for you.
First of all,
you can rename your methods.
So we could take your unconventional.h
file and make it conventional.h.
The compiler does name matching
based on what we call camel case,
which I hope you all know about.
So to fix this, what do you do?
You remove the hump.
So that you know what's
really going on there,
or you just adopt the new family
of naming conventions for that.
Well, I all know that you generally
have managers and stuff,
and changing names is often something
that invites some controversy.
So if you can't change the names,
we have remedy number two.
And that is we have ownership
transfer annotations.
And these have been around for a while,
in fact.
You just apply an NSReturns
not retained to methods that
aren't actually creating things.
And conversely,
you use NSReturns retained
for those that are.
So annotate your header file,
and then it won't matter which
part of it is ARC-compiled
and which part of it isn't.
Let's talk about those
ownership type qualifiers.
We've introduced four type
qualifiers to the language,
and I want to talk
about each one in turn.
First one is strong.
Strong variables retain their value.
It's the default.
You almost never have to type it.
Stack local variables,
including parameters,
are strong by default.
What this means is they never
hold a dangling reference.
They're either nil or
point to a valid object.
So that solves an amazing number of bugs.
The values are released sometime
after the last use of that variable.
And so from the intro talk,
this is the stack example of POP.
When the ARC compiler sees this,
what it does is it translates
that and adds a retain and
an auto-release on there.
So if that array was the
sole owner of that object,
that last object,
then we have retained it.
We've gotten rid of the
element from the array,
but it's still valid
because we have that retain.
And when we return it out,
we auto-release it so that you're
returning a valid object even if
it's now the only reference to it.
Weak variables, by contrast,
don't retain their values.
They're great for breaking cycles,
as you've seen.
They safely yield nil when read as
soon as the object starts deallocating.
and Stack Local Week variables
also work this way.
So let's take a look at this.
Let's take a look at this
example of fact in more detail.
So let's say you have a
routine called Test Week.
You create a new object and assign
it into the new object variable,
so it's holding the only
reference to that object.
And then you create a
weak reference to it.
As you've seen,
we use kind of dot dot dot for that.
What you haven't seen up to now
is that there's actually some
bookkeeping that goes on on the
side to help make this stuff work.
And so when you do a
new object equals nil,
the compiler of course
releases the old value,
so now there's no
references to that object.
And so that object starts to go away.
As part of going away,
it notifies the weak system,
and the weak system says, "Hmm, yeah,
how about that?
We have a reference to this,
a weak reference to that.
Let's clear out that weak
reference before we clean up our
bookkeeping data." And so it does.
The variable on the stack goes to nil,
and the bookkeeping data goes away.
It works.
It's really neat.
Well,
let me beat this horse a little bit more.
Let's say you create an object and
just stuff it into that weak value.
Well, what's going to happen here?
Well, let's take a look at what the
compiler does underneath you.
The compiler inserts a temporary,
holds that brand new object,
stores weak using the primitive,
and then releases that temp because
that's the last use of that variable.
Well, if you think about it,
this is exactly the same pattern
I just illustrated before.
You're releasing the only
reference to that object,
and of course,
this one's going to go to nil also.
So don't ever count on weak
references hanging on your values.
So, there are a couple things
to bear in mind about WEEK,
though.
It's only available on
Mac OS X.7 and on iOS 5.
The reason for that is that we've had to
tweak the retain-release implementations
of pretty much everywhere.
And so we can't do that
on earlier releases.
We can do that on iOS 5,
we can do that on 10.7,
but we can't do that in the past.
So when we've gone through at
Apple and looked at all these custom
retain-release implementations,
we found out that, wow,
we've sped up retain-release so much,
and Greg's going to talk
about that in the second half,
that you really don't need custom
retain-release implementations.
So we've deleted quite a few of them.
And if you're just doing
it for performance,
you should delete them as well,
in all likelihood.
So some classes that are very
old have had a little trouble
adopting the WEEK system.
And so, you know,
we've had to do a lot of work on that.
So, when we've gone through at
Apple and looked at all these custom
retain-release implementations,
we found out that, wow,
we've sped up retain-release so much,
and Greg's going to talk
about that in the second half,
that you really don't need custom
retain-release implementations.
So an NSWindow, an NSViewController,
for example,
are two classes you might run into.
You can't really form a
weak reference to them.
and you'll get a hard
crash if you try to.
So if you're going to use weeks,
make sure you test that code and
make sure that you can do that.
So another issue is if you're
using third-party libraries,
you should look to them,
especially if you're compiling them,
whether they have custom-retained
release implementations
and just be aware of that.
And if you have a case where you
need to have a weak reference
of some kind and you can't use
under-under-weak for some reason,
you'll need to use unsafe-unretained
as the alternative.
So let's talk about that.
So it's an old concept.
We've been using unsafe,
unretained variables forever.
That's what delegates are.
That's what @property_assign
is doing for you.
You use them among cooperating objects
to hold safe unretained references.
You make it safe by telling
all the clients of you,
by knowing and telling all the clients
of your object that hold these things
to clear them out when you go away.
Because the compiler does
nothing to help out with unsafe,
unretained items,
you can actually use them in structs.
That's kind of a side benefit.
Let's talk about that
cooperation thing a little bit.
I call it the "dialog dance."
So here's a contrived example.
Let's say you've got a
custom delegate controller.
It's got pointers to table view
and a do it button set up in
IB or maybe programmatically.
And in the dialog method,
you have to remember to clear them out.
And so you do this.
When the last reference
to your object goes away,
dialog is called, and when you run the
setDelegateNil methods,
those red,
those unsafe references get cleared out,
and then the runtime takes
care of removing the references
from your object back up,
and everything goes away
and things are fine.
Now obviously,
if you forget to write a dialog method,
or forget to do these set delegate nils,
you end up with dangling
references in these objects,
and that's not really,
that's not what you want to do.
So it requires more careful programming.
Auto-releasing is the last
attribute I want to talk about,
and that is -- and that's used primarily
for the Cocoa convention of not
transferring ownership across parameters.
Indirect pointer parameters are
treated this way by default,
and the basic idea is you just
slam a new value on it without
worrying about the previous value.
So when the compiler sees, say,
a KIP method that returns an NSError **,
it really treats it as if
it was an auto-releasing.
is the founder of LLVM.
He's been working on the
LLVM system for a long time.
He's been
Your code, however,
might not follow Cocoa convention here.
Sometimes, we are told, we've seen code,
you return ownership through a method.
So if you've got a method that returns
or creates an object indirectly,
you have to annotate it with
the strong directive to say,
"Hey,
I really want to retain value on the
other side of that when I do that."
And so you can do that by explicitly
declaring it with the strong directive.
So the three primary ones, strong, weak,
and unsafe unretained,
now have new attribute
names for add properties.
So we'd like you to think
about your object graph in
terms of strong and weak links,
and if you need to, unsafe unretained.
So strong is really just
a synonym for retain.
Unsafe unretained is
a synonym for assign.
They both still work and
still mean the same thing,
but we prefer you to just use strong,
weak, and unsafe unretained for this.
Let's talk about the copy convention.
So copy with zone is the
primitive for creating a copy.
And what do you do?
You call super to get an
empty shell for the new thing,
and for every instance
variable of interest,
you copy the value over.
Under arc, you don't have to do retains,
you still have to do
copies if you need to,
and it just works.
There are maybe ten people in this room,
though, who have had to think
about subclassing NSCell.
And NSCell can sometimes be a little
odd because it uses an NSCopy object.
Well, we fixed that under arc as well.
So this works with NSCell
subclasses as well.
Hmm, maybe more than 10 of you.
Exceptions.
So the Cocoa Convention for
exceptions is they're really bad.
If you throw an exception,
something really bad happens.
In fact,
your app is probably going to go down.
For recoverable errors,
you're supposed to use the
convention like NSError **.
If you throw an exception,
You're often going to leak an object.
You can have a retained object,
and unless you have a
try-catch handler around it,
an exception gets thrown,
that object gets leaked,
and that's also true under Arc.
This is a convention we don't want to
try to fix because it's expensive to fix.
So don't use exceptions.
On the other hand,
as you saw with the weak system,
you know, we actually keep pointers to
stack local variables around,
and so we really,
even though if you do catch exceptions,
we don't want you to crash because
the weak system goofed you up.
So we make sure that the weak system
gets cleaned up under exceptions,
so you don't have to worry about that.
Let's talk about blocks.
Blocks start out on the stack,
and they have to be copied
when they're stored into
anything that's more permanent,
like an instance variable or a global,
and when they're returned
or indirectly assigned.
You have to remember to
copy them to the heap,
or you have had to remember
to do this up till now.
So Arc automates this so that
instead of having to remember to
do copy-auto-release or copies,
you just write the
code you want to write.
just assign it into an instance variable.
are global or returner,
and it just works.
The bottom line is that
blocks work best under Arc,
and that's really true.
[Transcript missing]
You form a strong reference
to it by just reading it.
Strong self equals weak self.
And if strong self exists,
then you can safely dereference
it and tell my view to blank.
If you try just doing
weak self arrow my view,
well, that read of weak self might
have lost a race with another
thread that just got rid of that.
And it might have yielded nil,
and so you might have a crash there.
So be careful to always pull and
read and use -- don't use arrow
messaging with weak variables.
So with all that said,
with weak references in place,
when the last reference
to self goes away,
then of course the whole
thing recovers just nicely,
blinking or not.
Under-under-block variables have an
interesting behavior change under arc.
Block objects, like all other forms
of storage durations,
whatever,
are strong by default under arc.
Under non-arc, though,
the default is essentially unsafe,
unretained.
And people have taken advantage of this.
I saw this in the lab,
I've seen that inside Apple as well.
So some people have used an unretained
self block variable to do that same
trick that I showed you with weak before.
So under arc, you have a block object,
and you have a block object.
Under arc, with a behavior change,
this unretained reference now
becomes a retained reference,
and it's likely to cause a cycle.
So what do you do about that?
Well,
if the migrator hasn't fixed this for
you -- and it does in many cases --
you should try to -- you should convert
to using a weak variable instead.
And if you can't use weak because
you're shipping to an earlier platform,
then you can reintroduce that unsafe,
unretained behavior.
and it will work just
the way it did before.
One last topic, Objective-C++ under Arc.
Not much to say, it just works.
So you can use ownership
attributes in your classes.
What happens is the compiler
generates initializers that
initialize the values to nil,
that do the retain and the release,
or do the strong interactions,
and as such,
these become non-pod classes,
non-plain old data classes,
non-trivial destructors
and constructors and stuff.
Everything works.
Templates work, iterators work,
the collections work with
the C++ standard library.
And the only kind of funny thing is
that you have to use the attributes
in some places when using containers.
And with that,
it's time for Greg to come up
and talk about Arc Internals.
Thank you, Blaine.
I'd like to talk about some details
of the Arc runtime and Arc compiler
and what it's doing internally.
Arc from the inside.
So what is Arc?
You've heard an awful lot
of descriptions of Arc.
Here's the best description of Arc.
The compiler adds retainer
release calls to your code.
The compiler optimizer
removes some of them.
That's really it.
That's Arc.
So let's go into a little more detail.
This is the last session
of the conference,
so if you're not tired already,
let's make you tired.
Here's an example of some
strong variable code.
You have a method that takes an
IVAR and swaps the old value with the
new value and retains the old one.
So the Arc version of
the code looks like this:
no retains, no releases.
What does the compiler do?
compiler adds, retains, and releases.
It retains your parameter,
it retains the old value and
auto-releases it on the way out,
and it retains the new value
as it stores it into the IVAR.
What the compiler really
adds are C functions.
It doesn't actually call the methods.
So it calls new
C functions in the runtime,
but these C functions today
just call the methods,
so there's nothing
interesting going on there.
So this is what your code looks like
after the compiler frontend is done.
Now the optimizer goes to work.
It looks at these retains and says,
"Some of these are duplicates.
We retained a value and
immediately released it." Well,
that's dumb.
Don't do that.
Compiler optimizes your code,
removes some of the retains and releases,
so your code ends up like this.
Retains the new value on the way in,
does the work,
auto-releases the one going out,
which is what you would have
written without Arc anyway.
Let's take a look at what the
compiler does with weak variables.
Here we have a delegate
that we've marked weak,
and a setter method and
a getter method for it.
Again, the compiler adds retains and
releases for the parameters,
adds a retain auto-release
for a return value,
and it uses runtime functions to
read and write the weak variable.
This coordinates with the weak reference
system so that you don't read a dangling
pointer or write a pointer to an object
that's already dying and will become
dangling and not be able to read it.
This coordinates with the weak reference
system so that you don't read a dangling
pointer or write a pointer to an object
that's already dying and will become
dangling and not be able to read it.
This coordinates with the weak
reference system so that you don't read
a dangling pointer or write a pointer
to an object that's already dying
and will become dangling in a minute.
Of course,
when the optimizer goes to work,
extra retain-release goes away.
The compiler knows that load-week already
returns a retain-auto-release value,
so it doesn't need to
retain auto-release again.
Optimizer's smart, and your code looks
really simple like this.
So this is the code you would see
if you looked at the generated code,
if you traced through
your code in the debugger.
These are the functions
you'd end up with.
One final case.
Let's look at NSError.
NSError, we have a method returning an
NSError value to an ARC caller.
What does the compiler do with this code?
Well, remember what Blaine just said.
NSError variables are
implicitly auto-releasing.
Stack variables are implicitly strong.
We release the strong value
when the method is done.
And if this was all the compiler did,
you would crash.
You have the auto-released error value.
The compiler decided it also
needed to release it again.
And that's an over-release.
It doesn't work.
Luckily, the compiler does not do this.
The compiler adds that.
It adds a temporary auto-releasing
variable to catch the value
coming out of the method.
Then it stores that value
into the strong stack variable
and retains and releases it.
So the upshot is,
even though there's a mismatch
between auto-releasing and strong,
the compiler is smart
enough to paper over it,
patch up the problem with
a temporary variable,
and you don't have to think about it.
You just write this code, it works.
Fine.
NSERA works great.
If you want to be extra
double special clever,
you can write this.
You can explicitly mark your
stack variable auto-releasing.
Now the compiler doesn't
need a strong temporary,
doesn't need the extra
retain and release.
So if you are having a little
bit of performance trouble,
which you almost certainly won't,
you can add this sort of cue
to the compiler to help it know
exactly what you want to do.
So,
we've added a lot of runtime functions
that the compiler will add to your code.
You'll see these in your disassembly,
you may see these in
backtraces or while debugging.
The basic memory management calls,
of course, retain, release, auto-release.
They just call the methods.
The Week Reference System:
Load Week and Store Week to
read and write week variables.
Some other calls you might see.
The NSObject implementation now
lives in the Objective-C runtime.
So the implementations of
basic NSObject methods,
basic root class methods,
which is why it's called root alloc,
root retain, and a half dozen others,
will now show up in backtraces
and in instruments traces.
The AutoreleasePool implementation is
also now in the Objective-C runtime
with the AutoreleasePool
push and pop functions.
When you write @autoreleasepool,
that's what it looks like.
And finally, there's a set of functions
much longer than this list,
which are optimized versions or combined
versions of some of the functions,
some of the basic operations.
There's an optimization for
auto-released return values,
which I'll be talking about later.
And it uses functions like
auto-release return value and retain
auto-release said return value.
And there are other optimizations for
doing a retain and a store or a retain
without releasing the previous value,
things like that.
There are lots of these things.
We'll be adding more in the future.
Don't freak out when the
compiler adds them to your code.
Of course, most of these functions
are not for public use.
They're for the compiler to use.
They're not declared API.
So some of these functions
you can use directly.
The others, don't call them.
If you do,
the compiler may transform them.
Because the compiler thinks it
knows what's going on and thinks
that it called them itself.
So be careful about that.
Use the public API.
Don't use the stuff that you see in
the open source runtime directly.
Arc modifies the destruction of objects.
So let's look at what
happens when an object dies.
Of course, Arc releases your IVRs and
properties automatically for you,
and it also erases weak
variables automatically.
So it's modifying the
deallocation process.
Let's look at everything that
happens to an object as it dies.
We see the timeline of what happens
during the death of an object.
Let's look at these in detail.
The first thing that happens
is release is called,
and the retain count goes to
zero for the very last time.
The object is now deallocating.
It will die.
Since the object is deallocating,
we don't want to create
weak pointers to it anymore,
because you'd end up with a
dangling pointer when you're done.
So the release method tells
the weak reference system,
"This object is dying.
Don't do any weak references
anymore." And then the release
method calls self-dealloc,
the normal thing.
Self-dialog starts the dialog chain,
starting with the subclass dialog.
If you wrote a dialog method,
this is where your code gets called.
If this is a non-ARC subclass,
this is where their dialog method
would be calling release methods and
delegate clears and things like that.
Each subclass calls superdialog,
we walk up the superclass chain,
and we eventually get to NSObjectDialog.
NSObjectDialog simply calls
the Objective-C runtime to
tell that the object is dead.
It goes through actually a couple
of different function calls here,
but you end up in ObjectDispose.
ObjectDispose does the rest
of the destruction work.
C++ IVARs are destructed,
Arc calls its release method here,
and associated references and weak
references to this object are cleared.
The point to note on the ordering is:
The destructors and the
Arc release are called after
your subclass dialog is called.
So in your dialog methods,
you can still use your C++ IVARs,
you can still use your Arc IVARs,
because they aren't dead yet.
They only die when the
dialog methods are all done,
and NSObjectDialog calls
the runtime to kill it.
Finally, Object Dispose calls us free.
And I hope you all know what free does.
But this is the final process
to destroy the object,
reclaim the memory.
It's gone for good now.
Let's talk about Arc adoption.
You've seen in some of the intro talks,
some of the other talks,
about what your code must
do to adopt Arc code.
You might have to modify how
the migrator can help you do it.
There are some low-level tasks that some
of you writing core foundation code,
for example, also need to modify,
and the migrator does not
generally help you here.
So low-level tasks include core
foundation usage may need to be modified.
If you have a custom
retain-release implementation or
a custom weak reference system,
those also may need to be adapted or
removed in order to work with Arc.
Let's look at core foundation.
Arc automates Objective-C.
It does not know about
core foundation code,
does not understand
core foundation types,
does not understand core foundation
memory management conventions.
So if you use core foundation
code or core foundation-like
objects like the address book
framework or core graphics objects,
you need to help Arc understand the
memory management that's going on so
it correctly manages the memory of
these sorts of objects as you use them.
Let's look at an example of what goes
wrong if you take unmodified core
foundation code and try and use Arc.
Here's a simple example we're calling
an address book function that returns
a retained core foundation string.
It has "copy" in the name.
That's core foundation "e" for "returns a
retained object." We are casting it to an
NSString and assigning it into an IVAR.
So, looks okay for Arc.
You know, we should get automatic
memory management.
Except that Arc doesn't
know what that copy does.
So, Arc adds a retain and release because
the NSString variable is strong.
But it didn't know that
there was a copy call.
It doesn't know there's
another retain in play.
So, we end up with two retains,
one release, and a leak.
So,
unmodified core foundation code may leak,
like that example.
Or, other code, it'll actually crash.
Or, if you're very lucky,
it may run correctly.
Now,
it would be really hard to go through
your code and find every single place
where you're using core foundation,
like trying to find
that cast to NSString.
That would be hard.
So the compiler helps you out.
The compiler helps you
out with compile errors,
because the compiler's good at that.
Any toll-free bridge cast from a core
foundation type to an Objective-C type
is an error with the ARC compiler.
It is disallowed.
Can't do it.
Well, most.
There's one exception
which I'll show you.
But most of the time, it disallows them.
So this is your cue at the
points of these errors.
There's Arc code with
core foundation usage.
You need to go through
and modify the code,
modify the cast to tell
Arc what is going on.
So there are three cases,
three different recipes for how
to modify your code depending what
you're doing with the CF object.
First case,
we have a method that returns a core
foundation object and you didn't use any
other core foundation memory management.
You just method return an object to you,
you use it, you're done.
Second case is similar.
Again, no CF retains or CF releases or
creates or copies in your code,
but the value came from something
other than a method return,
like the address book
function we just saw.
The final case is where you are
calling CF memory management.
You created a CF object yourself,
you released it, something like that.
So those are the three cases.
Let's look at the first one.
Core Foundation values
returned by methods.
This is an iOS example
of the UIImage class,
which has a method that returns
a Core Foundation CGImageRef.
Okay, fine.
We call it, we cast it to ID because we
want to store it into an array.
So this is a case where we have Arc code,
Core Foundation code.
How does it work?
The good answer is, in this case,
it works unchanged.
Arc knows that this was
returned by a method.
Methods have Cocoa naming conventions,
with Arc knows everything
about Cocoa naming conventions.
So it knows that this
Core Foundation object was returned,
auto-released in this case,
or copied in other cases,
and so it knows what memory management
to apply to the toll-free bridge flavor
of the CF object that we just had.
So this case is a little bit different.
case works.
Don't have to think about it.
No compile error.
So, simple cast if you got a value
from a method and you aren't
using other CF memory management.
Second case,
we have a core foundation value
they got from something other
than a method returning a CF type.
Here we have two different flavors
of read an object from array,
convert it to the other
toll-free bridged flavor,
and use it as is.
No memory management,
but no Cocoa convention
method returning a CF type.
So here,
the compiler tells you you have CF code.
You may need to modify this
memory management behavior,
so it will give you a compile
error for these two casts.
You don't want any memory management.
You just want to use the object as is.
Somebody else is retaining it.
Just do it.
The way to say just do it to
the compiler is to tell it,
"I'm doing a cast which is
bridged." This is a bridge cast
from core foundation type to
Objective-C type or vice versa.
So, again, no CF memory management
involved when you use Bridged.
Of course,
Arc may retain and release the NSString,
but you don't care whether it does that.
That's Arc's problem.
That's not memory management
you need to worry about.
So that's the second case.
If you have no CF memory management,
then either it works out of the box,
or you need to modify your
cast to say it's bridged.
The final case where your code
wrote CF memory management stuff.
For example,
that address book function again,
which is a copy function.
This is the old code, pre-ARC.
You copied it as a CF value,
moved it across the toll-free bridge,
and auto-released it.
Well, of course, this is ARC.
We don't have auto-releases
anymore in your code.
So now we have an unbalanced copy.
ARC doesn't know it's there
because it doesn't know about core
foundations memory conventions.
So how do you modify your code?
Well, you have a copy.
You should balance it with a release,
right?
Right.
you use a CF bridging release.
CF Bridging Release is a CF release.
It balances a previous CF retain
or copy or create CF function.
And it also safely
transfers the value to Arc.
So Arc will, of course,
retain or release the
value as it sees fit.
And the CF Bridging Release balances
the core foundation copy operation.
So it's really easy.
You just write code where
retains and releases balance.
Copy and release is fine.
And use the Bridging Release to hand
the value to Arc when you're done.
Going the other direction,
where we have a copy method,
we converted it to a CFString,
and then we CF released it.
Again, Arc knows about the copy method,
but it doesn't know about the CF release,
so we need to balance the
CF release with another retain.
And that looks like a CF bridging retain.
It's just the opposite
of a CF bridging release.
CF Bridging Retain is balanced by
an explicit CF release in your code,
like this one here.
That one up there.
Whichever screen you're looking at.
It also safely accepts
the value from Arc,
so it makes sure that Arc doesn't delete
that copied value before we've got it
handed over to CF's responsibility.
So this is the ownership transfer
that you need to use going in and out
of toll-free bridge code if you have
Core Foundation Memory Management.
So that's the third case.
If you have Memory Management and
you're moving code in and out of Arc,
then use a CF Bridging Retain or a
CF Bridging Release to match the other
Core Foundation Memory Management you
already have.
There's one slight caveat to everything
that I just said about Core Foundation.
The WWCC compiler does not
implement any of what I just said.
It still has the cast
as an error feature,
but it uses a different set of functions
for handling memory management transfers
and telling Arc what is going on.
So if you go to the
Apple developer website,
look up the Programming
with Arc Release Notes,
it will have two sections on
how to manage CF objects and
how to manage CF objects with
the WWDC compilers and tools.
In the future, in the next seed release,
some future release,
you will get what I just said,
and you can go back and watch
the video again and convert all
your code to use that instead.
Other low-level things
you may need to modify.
If you have custom retain
and release methods,
they must be adapted for Arc.
The problem is the release method and the
weak reference system need to coordinate
in order to avoid race conditions
when an object is being destroyed
and you're trying to read a weak
reference pointer to the same object.
The release and the weak reference
system need to have multi-thread
synchronization to make sure
that weak system works correctly.
If you have custom retain
and release implementations,
they therefore must evolve or die.
So if you wanted to evolve your
custom weak reference system,
there are two new
methods you need to add.
You need to change most of
the rest of the methods.
There are subtle race conditions.
It's actually very difficult
to do any of this correctly.
Depending what your custom
retain and release do,
there's no simple recipe.
It depends if you're using a
local IVAR or if you're using it
to do teardown or if you're using
it to do special singletons.
Short answer is we don't recommend it.
It's possible to modify
a custom reference system
until it works with weak.
We don't recommend it.
It's hard.
We did it a bunch of times
wrong inside Apple before we
figured out how to do it right.
We're pretty sure it's right now.
We recommend something else.
We have two other recommendations.
First recommendation, delete your custom
retain-release implementation.
NSObject's retainer
release is much faster.
If yours existed for performance,
you may not need the extra
performance anymore with faster
machines and faster NSObject code.
If you had custom teardown logic,
you were releasing stuff when your
retain count dropped to three,
for example, real code does this.
Don't do that anymore.
Use weak variables in Arc to do the
teardown logic you need instead.
If you have a singleton pattern
using custom retainer release,
use a simpler singleton pattern that
doesn't have retainer release anymore.
So, recommendation one, delete it.
There's one other benefit to deleting
your custom retainer release,
is that future improvements to retainer
release performance are likely only
to apply to default retainer release,
not custom retainer release.
So we may make it faster
and leave you behind.
So, delete it.
Recommendation number two,
if you really do need your custom
retain-release system still,
you can disallow weak
references to your class.
You can write this method,
allows weak reference return, no.
In this case, if somebody tries to form a
weak reference to your object,
you'll get a crash instead.
So,
a much simpler transformation if you do
need your retained release system and
you don't need to use weak references.
If you want to keep both,
it's really hard and I'm not
going to explain it here today.
The last advanced thing you may need to
modify are custom weak reference systems.
We know several of these
things exist in the wild.
We found, I forget how many,
in Apple's own frameworks
of weak reference systems,
some of which were
actually mostly correct.
Mostly thread safe,
mostly didn't crash if dalloc
called retain and release again,
that sort of thing.
So, one way to adapt your weak reference
system is to replace it with Arc.
Use Arc weak variables instead
of your weak reference system.
Well, that's easy, that's good.
If you like your weak reference system,
if you have a bunch of code
using whatever your API is,
you can always rewrite it.
Modify the internal implementation
of your weak system to use our API,
the load weak and store weak
functions that I mentioned earlier.
These are public API that
you can use to interface with
Arc's weak reference system.
In non-Arc code, I should say.
If you have Arc code that tries
to say "load weak," compiler
will not like you very much.
So here's an example if you were going
to modify your weak reference system.
Here we have a getter and a
setter and a dealloc method for
a weak IVAR in non-ARC code.
We can use the loadWeek
function to read it,
the storeWeek function to write it,
and this is very, very important,
the storeWeek function writing
nil when the variable goes out of
scope to clear the weak reference
machinery and make sure the weak
reference system doesn't write a
nil to that address sometime later.
So this is how you would modify a
weak reference system or some weak
variable if you outside your ARC code.
Let's look at performance.
Performance is, of course,
really important for everyone.
And it's also important for
Arc because for some code,
we're adding more retains and more
releases than the same manual coded
code might have had previously.
So we've improved performance
with a lot of the primitives.
Retain and release.
Arc uses retain and release.
Everybody else uses retain and release.
We made it faster.
We made it a lot faster
in Lion and iOS 5.
Autorelease pool.
Autorelease pools get used quite a bit.
There are a lot of loops and code,
things like that,
that try and go out of their way
to use a few autorelease pools
instead of one every iteration.
Well, we didn't like that.
We said, first of all,
we can make NSAutoreleasePool faster,
and we did that.
And then we said, at AutoreleasePool,
we can make it way faster.
It's way faster because it doesn't
need an AutoreleasePool fake object.
It doesn't need obcmsend
alloc init drain.
So the @AutoreleasePool construct is
about six times faster than the old
NSAutoreleasePool alloc init was.
So the moral of this slide,
if you have a loop that's, you know,
you're trying not to
use auto-release pools,
just throw them in.
It's cheap.
It's like as fast as a function call now.
Last example I want to
show you for performance is
auto-release return values.
We've made this faster.
Let me explain what I mean.
This code has a getter method that
returns an auto-release result,
and we have a caller which is
calling the getter method and
retaining the value it got back.
Well, we have this auto-release which
immediately gets retained again.
This is just extra work.
This is just trying to get
the interface so it's clean.
We don't have to think
about memory management.
But the auto-release
and retain are wasted,
and the object lives longer
than it might have to because
it's in the auto-release pool.
And on iOS,
we tell people don't auto-release
if you don't have to because
there's that extra cost.
We can do better,
and we have done better.
The Arc compiler will
write this code this way.
Two Objective-C runtime functions:
auto-releasing a return value
is a specialized function,
and retaining a return value
that you got auto-released.
Two separate operations that
coordinate to optimize it.
The actual implementation is really cool.
It's really clever and
I wish I had thought of it,
but I didn't.
These two functions,
the function in the getter method
looks up the call stack to see
what the caller is about to do with
the value that it just retained.
If these two functions see
each other on the call stack,
then we optimize it.
The return value is saved in thread local
storage for the other function to see,
and we don't auto-release
and we don't retain.
That's a really good optimization.
What if you have mixed code
where only some of it is
built with the ARC compiler?
You might have this.
The getter method has
the optimized function,
but the caller is just calling
retain because it's not ARC.
What happens then?
The two sides look for each other,
and the caller says,
the getter method says, "Whoops,
this guy doesn't know what I'm doing.
He's not smart.
He's not optimized.
So I'll do the old
thing." No optimization,
just call, auto-release,
and retain as usual.
So if we have the caller and the callee
are both arc or they're both properties,
then the optimization will kick in.
And what happens?
It gets something like this much faster.
The first chart --
It's great.
The first chart is the expense of the
extra auto-release and the extra retain.
And of course, the optimized code,
just looking at the memory in the stack,
stuffing in thread local storage,
that's really fast.
So in the optimized case,
the extra overhead of
auto-release retain is just gone.
So as more people adopt Arc,
the optimization will
kick in in more places.
So we're really looking forward to that.
And that's Arc in Objective-C,
Automated Reference Counting with
ownership qualifiers so you think
about your object-graph's relationships
rather than retain-release.
If you have low-level memory
management like Core Foundation,
you may need to adapt.
And Arc has costs for some code,
but we have performance improvements
to balance some of the costs.
For more information,
definitely visit the Programming
with Arc release notes
on the developer website.
If you have questions,
we don't have time for QA today,
but you can find me on the
Apple Dev Forums under the
Developer Tools sections,
or you can contact the
DevTools evangelist,
Mike Jurowicz,
at the email address shown.
Related sessions and the
videos you may want to watch,
the Arc intro session, of course,
more details about Blocks and
Grand Central Dispatch in practice,
and, of course, Arc is LLVM only,
so move to the LLVM compiler,
visit the session there.
Thank you.